Adding EDI tools proposal (#1)
ballerina-platform/edi-tools: docs/proposals/edi.md

code for converting their EDI collections into importable libraries. Therefore, integration developers can simply import those
libraries and convert EDI messages into Ballerina records via a single line of code.

The command below can be used to generate EDI libraries.

```bash
$ bal edi lib <org name> <library name> <EDI mappings folder> <output folder>
```

The Ballerina library project will be generated in the output folder. This library can be built and published by
issuing the `bal pack` and `bal push` commands from the output folder. However, once the support for `generated` directories is provided,
it should be able to import the generated code to the user code.

Then, the generated library can be imported into any Ballerina project, and the generated utility functions of the library can
be invoked to parse EDI messages into Ballerina records. For example, the Ballerina code below parses an `X12 834` EDI
message into the corresponding Ballerina record.

```ballerina
m834:Benefit_Enrollment_and_Maintenance b = check hl71:readEDI(ediText, hl71:EDI_834).ensureType();
```

> 

Reviewer: Unnecessary extra new lines.

          "tag": "date"
        }
      ]
    },
    "ITM": {
      "tag": "items",
      "maxOccurances": -1,
      "fields": [
        {
          "tag": "item"
        },
        {
          "tag": "quantity",
          "dataType": "int"
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

Above mapping can be used to parse EDI documents with one HDR segment (mapped to "header") and any number of ITM
segments (mapped to "items"). HDR segment contains three fields, which are mapped to "orderId", "organization" and "
date". Each ITM segment contains two fields mapped to "item" and "quantity". Below is a sample EDI document that can be
parsed using the above mapping (let's assume that the below EDI is saved in edi-sample1.edi file).

## Converting Smooks mapping files to Ballerina mappings

Smooks library is commonly used for parsing EDI files. Therefore, many organizations have already created Smooks
mappings for their EDIs. Ballerina EDI module can convert such Smooks mapping to Ballerina compatible mappings so that
organizations can start using Ballerina for EDI processing without redoing any mappings.

The following command converts Smooks EDI mapping to Ballerina EDI mapping:

```shell

> bal smooksToBal <Smooks mapping xml file path> <Ballerina mapping json file path>

Reviewer 2: IMO we better keep all the EDI sub-commands under the `bal edi` command (similar to what we have done for `bal dist` command).
Then the commands would look like below. 
 - `$bal edi smooks <args>`
 -  `$bal edi esl <args>`
 -  `$bal edi gen <args>`
 -  `$bal edi lib <args>`

Author: +1 for `$bal edi gen <args>` and `$bal edi lib <args>`.
But `$bal edi smooks <args>` and  `$bal edi esl <args>` do not imply what exactly those commands do.

Reviewer 3: Yes, we may have to find better names for bal edi smook and esl. May be "bal edi smooks-convert ...", etc.
Anyway we have wait until module specific commands are supported in bal command.

ESL is another format used in EDI mapping files. The Ballerina EDI tool can convert ESL mappings into Ballerina compatible
mappings, so that it is possible to generate Ballerina code and process EDIs defined in ESLs without having to rework on
mappings.

The following command converts ESL files to Ballerina EDI mappings. Note that segment definitions are given in a separate
file, which is usually shared by multiple ESL mappings.

```
bal eslToBal <ESL file path or directory> <ESL segment definitions path> <output json path or directory>
```

If a directory containing multiple ESL files is given as the input, all ESLs will be converted to Ballerina mappings
and written into the output directory.

## Code generation

Ballerina records can be generated using the EDI mapping file to represent an EDI document. There are two options to
generate records in ballerina.

- **Using ballerina command**

  Ballerina records for the above EDI mapping in edi-mapping1.json can be generated as follows (generated Ballerina
  records will be saved in orderRecords.bal).

```shell
bal codegen edi-mapping1.json orderRecords.bal
```

Generated Ballerina records for the above mapping are shown below.

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```ballerina
```

      "quantity": 58
    },
    {
      "item": "K-80",
      "quantity": 250
    },
    {
      "item": "T-46",
      "quantity": 28
    }
  ]
}
```

A sample Ballerina project which uses the EDI library is given
in [here](https://github.com/chathurace/ballerina-edi/tree/main/samples/simpleEDI)

Also refer to [resources](https://github.com/chathurace/ballerina-edi/tree/main/edi/resources) section for example
mapping files and edi samples.

## Creating an EDI library

Usually, organizations have to work with many EDI formats, and integration developers need to have a convenient way to
work on EDI data with minimum effort. EDI libraries facilitate this by allowing organizations to pack all EDI processing
code for to their EDI collections into an importable library. Therefore, integration developers can simply import those
libraries and convert EDI messages into Ballerina records in a single line of code.

Below command can be used to generate EDI libraries:

```
bal libgen <org name> <library name> <EDI mappings folder> <output folder>
```

The Ballerina library project will be generated in the output folder. This library can be built and published by issuing "

> bal pack" and "bal push" commands from the output folder.

Reviewer 2: once we have the support for `generated` directories, we should be able to generate the same library under the `generated` directory under the same package and, import it in user's code (without having to publish to central)

# Proposal: EDI

_Owners_: @chathurace @ruks  
_Reviewers_:     
_Created_: 2023/03/31  
_Updated_:   
_Issue_: [#495](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-extended-library/issues/495)

## Summary

> To enable EDI integrations, having EDI file processing capabilities is essential. This library provides functionalities

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 Having EDI file processing capabilities is essential to enable EDI integrations. This library provides the functionalities
```

to parse EDI files and write additional logic on those data.

> ## Module Overview

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Module overview
```
We use sentence case in titles of all Ballerina documentation.

EDI module provides functionality to read EDI files and map those to Ballerina records or 'json' type. Mappings for EDI

> files have to be provided in json format. Once a mapping is provided, EDI module can generate Ballerina records to hold

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
files have to be provided in JSON format. Once a mapping is provided, the EDI package can generate Ballerina records to hold
```
Is it `module` or `package`?

Author: should be module and it is updated

> data in any EDI file represented by that mapping. Then the module can read EDI files (in text format) in to generated

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
data in any EDI file represented by that mapping. Then, the module can read EDI files (in text format) and convert them into generated
```

> Ballerina records or as json values, which can be accessed from Ballerina code.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Ballerina records or JSON values, which can be accessed from Ballerina code.
```
Please check if the technical meaning is affected by the suggestions.

## EDI file structure

Here is a simple sample for EDI file

```
HDR*ORDER_1201*ABC_Store*2008-01-01~
ITM*A-250*12
ITM*A-45*100
ITM*D-10*58
ITM*K-80*250
ITM*T-46*28
```

An EDI file is a binary computer file that contains data arranged in units called data elements. Data elements are
separated by element terminators(*), and a group of data elements makes up a data segment. Data segments are separated
by
segment terminators(~).

## EDI mapping file

> In order to parse an EDI document to ballerina readable code, an EDI mapping file is required. The mapping file can be

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An EDI mapping file is required in order to parse an EDI document to Ballerina-readable code. The mapping file can be
```

> manually implemented by a human for a given EDI document or can be converted from an existing definition like `Smooks`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
implemented manually for a given EDI document or can be converted from an existing definition like `Smooks`
```

or `ESL`.

> Here is a sample EDI mapping file(edi-mapping1.json) for the above EDI document.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The below is a sample EDI mapping file (i.e., `edi-mapping1.json`) for the above EDI document.
```
Shall we have a more meaningful name for the file to reflect the functionality of the sample instead of saying `edi-mapping1`?

```json
{
  "name": "SimpleOrder",
  "delimiters": {
    "segment": "~",
    "field": "*"
  },
  "segments": {
    "HDR": {
      "tag": "header",
      "fields": [
        {
          "tag": "orderId"
        },
        {
          "tag": "organization"
        },
        {
          "tag": "date"
        }
      ]
    },
    "ITM": {
      "tag": "items",
      "maxOccurances": -1,
      "fields": [
        {
          "tag": "item"
        },
        {
          "tag": "quantity",
          "dataType": "int"
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

> Above mapping can be used to parse EDI documents with one HDR segment (mapped to "header") and any number of ITM

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The above mapping can be used to parse EDI documents with one HDR segment (mapped to `header`) and any number of ITM
```

> segments (mapped to "items"). HDR segment contains three fields, which are mapped to "orderId", "organization" and "

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
segments (mapped to `items`). The HDR segment contains three fields, which are mapped to `orderId`, `organization`, and `
```

> date". Each ITM segment contains two fields mapped to "item" and "quantity". Below is a sample EDI document that can be

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
date`. Each ITM segment contains two fields mapped to `item` and `quantity`. The below is a sample EDI document that can be
```

> parsed using the above mapping (let's assume that the below EDI is saved in edi-sample1.edi file).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
parsed using the above mapping (assuming that the EDI below is saved in the `edi-sample1.edi` file).
```
Maybe, we can have a more meaningful file name here also?

Author: since these are the existing files, in the https://github.com/chathurace/ballerina-edi/tree/main/samples/simpleEDI repo, we will change once they are moved to this repo.

## Converting Smooks mapping files to Ballerina mappings

Smooks library is commonly used for parsing EDI files. Therefore, many organizations have already created Smooks
mappings for their EDIs. Ballerina EDI module can convert such Smooks mapping to Ballerina compatible mappings so that
organizations can start using Ballerina for EDI processing without redoing any mappings.

> The following command converts Smooks EDI mapping to Ballerina EDI mapping:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The command below converts a Smooks EDI mapping to a Ballerina EDI mapping.
```

> ```shell

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```bash
```
Please check all occurrences.

> bal edi smooksToBal <Smooks mapping xml file path> <Ballerina mapping json file path>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
$ bal edi smooksToBal <Smooks mapping xml file path> <Ballerina mapping json file path>
```
Please check all occurrences.

```

> For example, the below command converts the Smooks mapping for

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For example, the command below converts the Smooks mapping for
```

EDIFACT [Invoice EDI](https://github.com/chathurace/ballerina-edi/blob/main/edi/resources/d3a-invoic-1/mapping.xml) to a

> Ballerina compatible JSON mapping.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Ballerina-compatible JSON mapping.
```

```shell
bal edi smooksToBal d3a-invoic-1/mapping.xml d3a-invoic-1/mapping.json
```

Generated JSON mapping is
shown [here](https://github.com/chathurace/ballerina-edi/blob/main/edi/resources/d3a-invoic-1/mapping.json).

Then we can use the generated JSON mapping to generate Ballerina records and to parse invoice EDIs as shown above.

## Converting EDI Schema Language (ESL) files to Ballerina compatible mappings

> ESL is another format used in EDI mapping files. The Ballerina EDI tool can convert ESL mappings into Ballerina compatible

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
ESL is another format used in EDI mapping files. The Ballerina EDI tool can convert ESL mappings into Ballerina-compatible
```

> mappings, so that it is possible to generate Ballerina code and process EDIs defined in ESLs without having to rework on

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
mappings so that it is possible to generate Ballerina code and process EDIs defined in ESLs without having to rework on the
```

mappings.

> The following command converts ESL files to Ballerina EDI mappings. Note that segment definitions are given in a separate

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following command converts ESL files to Ballerina EDI mappings. Note that segment definitions are given in a separate
```
Shall we add this as a `note` section?

file, which is usually shared by multiple ESL mappings.

```

> bal edi eslToBal <ESL file path or directory> <ESL segment definitions path> <output json path or directory>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
$ bal edi eslToBal <ESL file path or directory> <ESL segment definitions path> <output json path or directory>
```

```

If a directory containing multiple ESL files is given as the input, all ESLs will be converted to Ballerina mappings
and written into the output directory.

## Code generation

Ballerina records can be generated using the EDI mapping file to represent an EDI document. There are two options to
generate records in ballerina.

- **Using ballerina command**

>   Ballerina records for the above EDI mapping in edi-mapping1.json can be generated as follows (generated Ballerina

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  Ballerina records for the above EDI mapping in the `edi-mapping1.json` file can be generated as follows (generated Ballerina
```

>   records will be saved in orderRecords.bal).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  records will be saved in the `orderRecords.bal` file).
```

> ```shell

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```bash
```

bal edi gen edi-mapping1.json orderRecords.bal
```

> Generated Ballerina records for the above mapping are shown below.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The generated Ballerina records for the above mapping are shown below.
```

```ballerina
type Header_Type record {|
   string orderId?;
   string organization?;
   string date?;
|};

type Items_Type record {|
   string item?;
   int quantity?;
|};

type SimpleOrder record {|
   Header_Type header;
   Items_Type[] items?;
|};
```

> - **Using compiler plugin at the build time**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **Using compiler plugin at the build time**
```
Shall we make this a sub heading?

>   The ballerina compiler plugin can be configured to generate EDI records during the build time. This support for ballerina is

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  The Ballerina compiler plugin can be configured to generate EDI records during the build time. This support for Ballerina is
```

  still under development and once it is available, EDI records can be generated using that feature.

## Parsing EDI files

> The below code reads the edi-sample1.edi into a json variable named "orderData" and then convert the orderData json to the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The code below reads the `edi-sample1.edi` into a JSON variable named `orderData` and then converts the `orderData` JSON to the
```

> generated record "SimpleOrder". Once EDI documents are mapped to the SimpleOrder record, any attribute in the EDI can be

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
generated `SimpleOrder` record. Once EDI documents are mapped to the `SimpleOrder` record, any attribute in the EDI can be
```

> accessed using record's fields as shown in the example code below.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
accessed using the fields of the record as shown in the example code below.
```

```ballerina
import ballerina/io;
import chathurace/edi.core as edi;

public function main() returns error? {
    edi:EDIMapping mapping = check edi:readMappingFromFile("resources/edi-mapping1.json");

    string ediText = check io:fileReadString("resources/edi-sample1.edi");
    json orderData = check edi:readEDIAsJson(ediText, mapping);
    io:println(orderData.toJsonString());

    SimpleOrder order1 = check orderData.cloneWithType(SimpleOrder);
    io:println(order1.header.date);
}
```

> "orderData" json variable value will be as follows (i.e. output of io:println(orderData.toJsonString())):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `orderData` JSON variable value will be as follows (i.e., the output of `io:println(orderData.toJsonString())`).
```

```json
{
  "header": {
    "orderId": "ORDER_1201",
    "organization": "ABC_Store",
    "date": "2008-01-01"
  },
  "items": [
    {
      "item": "A-250",
      "quantity": 12
    },
    {
      "item": "A-45",
      "quantity": 100
    },
    {
      "item": "D-10",
      "quantity": 58
    },
    {
      "item": "K-80",
      "quantity": 250
    },
    {
      "item": "T-46",
      "quantity": 28
    }
  ]
}
```

> A sample Ballerina project which uses the EDI library is given

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This [sample Ballerina project](https://github.com/chathurace/ballerina-edi/tree/main/samples/simpleEDI) uses the EDI library.
```
The word `here` shouldn't be used for hyperlinks.

> in [here](https://github.com/chathurace/ballerina-edi/tree/main/samples/simpleEDI)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
in [here](https://github.com/chathurace/ballerina-edi/tree/main/samples/simpleEDI)
```
This seems to be in a personal GitHub repo. Please check.

Author: yes, the plan is to move them to this repo. once those are moved, I'll update this document.

> Also refer to [resources](https://github.com/chathurace/ballerina-edi/tree/main/edi/resources) section for example

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Also, for example mapping files and EDI samples, see [resources](https://github.com/chathurace/ballerina-edi/tree/main/edi/resources).
```

> mapping files and edi samples.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

```

## Creating an EDI library

> Usually, organizations have to work with many EDI formats, and integration developers need to have a convenient way to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Usually, organizations have to work with many EDI formats and integration developers need to have a convenient way to
```

> work on EDI data with minimum effort. EDI libraries facilitate this by allowing organizations to pack all EDI processing

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
work on EDI data with minimum effort. The EDI libraries facilitate this by allowing organizations to pack all EDI-processing
```

> code for to their EDI collections into an importable library. Therefore, integration developers can simply import those

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
code for converting their EDI collections into importable libraries. Therefore, integration developers can simply import those
```
Check if the technical meaning is affected by the suggestions.

> libraries and convert EDI messages into Ballerina records in a single line of code.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
libraries and convert EDI messages into Ballerina records via a single line of code.
```

> Below command can be used to generate EDI libraries:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The command below can be used to generate EDI libraries.
```
